Extrinsics Value System
=======================

Introduction: 
-------------


Humans are social creatures and tribal by nature.  While the merits of tribal behavior may be disputable, tribal instincts in humans drive us to measure all others by their social virtue.  Social virtue is the reflection of the perceived moral and ethical character of an individual as well as the measure of that individual's contributions to society.  These are all subjective notions.  Different tribes and social groups have differing standards for moral and ethical behavior.  The measure of one's contribution to society is subject to potentially dishonest social signaling as well as biases towards or against intrinsic properties that are perceived to have value to that society.

The Extrinsics Value System provides a system for unbiased value judgements, a system for honestly measuring social virtue based on these principles: 

* Human qualities can be separated into intrinsic and extrinsic properties.
* Human behaviors can be separated into intrinsic and extrinsic behaviors.
* Composite properties are combined from intrinsic and extrinsic properties and behaviors.
* The social virtue of such properties and behaviors may be measured independently of individuals exhibiting the properties or behaviors.
* The independently measured social virtues of properties and behaviors are bestowed upon individuals exhibiting those properties or behaviors.
* Every individual receives the same measure of social virtue of an exhibited property or behavior regardless of any other properties or behaviors, position or other social standing.
* The aggregation of all social virtues received through extrinsic or composite properties and behaviors is the social virtue of the individual.
* Intrinsic properties and behaviors are factors of intrinsic attraction in personal social relationships and interactions such as friendship or attraction.
* Intrinsic properties should not be a factor in business or professional interactions, public or social policy, or any other institutional action or behavior.
* There are exceptions to every rule, but exceptions should be made with extreme care and deliberation and should truly be considered exceptional.

In this system of valuation, actions, behaviors, and decisions may be considered rationally without the entanglement of sentiment or bias for the individual responsible for those actions, behaviors or decisions.  This leads to a more honest and rational measure of the social virtue of an individual.  Individuals are not judged or measured.  The actions, behaviors and decisions are judged, and individuals acquire the results of those judgements indirectly.

The important takeaways, in plain language:

* You can like a person (intrinsic attraction) who has no positive social virtue.
* You can dislike a person (intrinsic repulsion) who has unimpeachable social virtue.
* It is easy to confuse intrinsic attraction or repulsion with positive or negative social virtue.
* However, you should not trust someone in a position of power who has no positive social virtue, even if you like the person.

Public policy and any honest personal code of ethics should avoid considerations of intrinsic properties when judging the social virtue of an individual. Instead, a rigorous examination of extrinsic properties and behaviors should should inform opinion.


Properties and Behavior
-----------------------

### Summary

The Extrinsics Value System requires 

***Intrinsic properties*** are the set of all qualities that are acquired outside of the control or consent of the individual.  For example, every person has intrinsic properties that include genetics, circumstances of birth, race, age, gender, sexuality and belief. Some are defined at birth, some are developed during childhood through growth and other experiences before the person is capable of making rational, independent decisions.  Intrinsic properties also include any physical or mental afflictions forced upon an individual against the will of the individual, such as emotional or physical scars from an assault.

By contrast, ***extrinsic properties*** are those qualities acquired through rational and independent actions or choices.  Work experience and life skills, education, public records of actions and behavior, and intentional physical enhancements are but some examples of extrinsic properties.

***Extrinsic behaviors*** are the rational and independent actions, and decisions of a person.  Extrinsic properties are typically a record of extrinsic behaviors, whether recorded digitally, socially, on paper or on the person's own body.

***Intrinsic behaviors*** are normally unmeasurable and undetectable.  These include motivations, inner thoughts, moods and feelings.  Even if confessed or logically deduced, intrinsic behaviors are susceptible to misinterpretation even by the individual committing them.  Intrinsic behaviors, while real and powerful, can never be measured or quantified accurately.  The most sincere assertion of truth about intrinsic behavior may be a lie, even if it is unintentional and the result of a misunderstanding of one's own motivations.

***Composite properties*** are derived from the combination of intrinsic properties and extrinsic properties and behaviors.  Vision and hearing are such composite properties, both being a combination of innate physical characteristics and the behaviors over one's lifetime that affect the health and strength of the physical systems involved.

There are important distinctions between the different types of properties and behaviors:

* Intrinsic properties describe who you are.
* Extrinsic properties describe what you have chosen to do or who you have attempted to become.
* Composite properties are quantifiable results of intrinsic properties and extrinsic behaviors.
* Intrinsic behaviors are subjective and unquantifiable.
* Extrinsic behaviors can be objectively factual records of actions and decisions.

***Intrinsic attraction*** deserves a mention as a particular intrinsic behavior.  Intrinsic attraction includes both sexual and non-sexual attraction.  For example, friendship and other interpersonal social relationships result from intrinsic attraction.  Intrinsic attraction impedes rational judgement when considering social virtue.  It is easy to forgive or overlook negative social virtues in a friend, a lover, a family member, a member of your tribe, or even an individual you would like to share in any of the aforementioned relationships.

***Intrinsic repulsion*** is equally important to recognize.  Tribal instincts cause intrinsic repulsion of those who are "outsiders" or different or who just don't generate intrinsic attraction.  Intrinsic repulsion also impedes rational judgement when considering social virtue.  It is easy to overlook or deny positive social virtues in an individual who causes intrinsic repulsion.

It is crucial to recognize these behaviors and their potential to impede rational judgement and to generate double-standards and hypocrisy.  These very behaviors are the reason the Extrinsics Value System must exist.  We need tools for separating our intrinsic attraction and revulsion from our rational consideration of the social virtues of an individual.  A good leader need not look like a friend, just as a friend may not make a good leader.


### Intrinsic Properties
Intrinsic properties have two classifications: 

* **_Innate_**
	* existing from the time of the entity's creation
	* not easily changed without the applications of ethically questionable science and medicine
	* Examples:
    	* Hair, eye, skin color
    	* Intelligence
    	* Gender
    	* Genetic defects such as susceptibility to disease
    	* Sexual preference
* **_Acquired_**
	* developed as a result of experiences and circumstances beyond the control of the entity
	* often developed before the entity has independence of choice or rationality of thought
	* may be developed later in life as the result of (physical or emotional) trauma, coercion or various forms of assault
	* Examples:
    	* Religious belief
    	* Social attitudes (gender, racial, ethnic bias)
    	* Socioeconomic background
    	* Ethnicity
    	* Scars, amputations, or other bodily damage


### Extrinsic Properties

Extrinsic properties are the result of extrinsic behavior.  Extrinsic properties have two classifications:

* **_Primary_**
	* measured directly and objectively
	* intentionally acquired physical characteristics (body modifications, some indications of fitness) and objectively measurable skills (surgical skills, technical skills, math skills, language skills, etc)
	* directly observable, quantifiable or qualitatively measurable
	* Examples: 
    	* Job skills and experience
    	* Tattoos, piercings, other body decorations or augmentations (these may be reversable)
* **_Secondary_**
	* measured indirectly and subjectively
	* indirectly observable through evidence of extrinsic behavior (compassion, loyalty, initiative, etc)
	* often described with pairs of opposing terms
	* Examples: 
    	* Loyal vs disloyal
    	* Ethical vs unethical
    	* Compassionate vs indifferent


### Composite Properties

Some properties are composites of more than one property type.

#### Innate Intrinsic + Primary Extrinsic
Innate properties that are directly effected over time by extrinsic behavior, resulting in a composite of innate intrinsic and primary extrinsic properties

Examples:

* Vision
* Hearing
* Wisdom
* Fitness
* Health

#### Modified Innate/Acquired Intrinsic

Some intrinsic properties may be developed or altered extrinsically, but without voluntary disclosure by the entity.  These should always be assumed to be pure innate or acquired intrinsic properties.

Examples:

* Gender
* Sexual preference
* Religious belief

Some modifications are temporary and may be difficult to distinguish from purely innate properties.  On first contact with an individual, such temporary modifications may be indistinguishable from purely innate properties.

Examples:

* Applying hair dye or makeup are extrinsic behaviors that do not alter the innate intrinsic property.


Some modifications may be intentionally transmitted through social signaling.

Some modifications may be unintentionally transmitted, or other individuals may publicly disclose modifications without an individual's consent.





### Extrinsic Behavior

Extrinsic behavior consists of rational and independent choices, actions and decisions.  Rational and independent in this context does not forgive or excuse actions performed as a member of a group or in a moment when emotion interferes with rational thought.

Examples:

  * Publicly recorded actions
  * Actions inhibiting or  Intrinsic Liberty.

### Intrinsic Behavior

EVS does not attempt to measure or record intrinsic behavior.  


### Motivation

Extrinsic behavior is driven by motivation, which comes in many forms. Extrinsics does not attempt to catalogue or measure motivation. Any attempt to assess motivation in a human is inexact at best.


Value Judgements
------------------

It is fair and rational to place value judgements on extrinsic properties, but only if the judgements are placed on those properties without the context of which individuals have acquired those properties. Sentiment and bias interfere with proper judgement of extrinsic qualities when viewed within the context of an individual. All questions of motivation and degree being equal, the same action, performed by different individuals, must carry the same value judgement, and every individual must equally acquire the corresponding value judgements of the action.

These distinctions are necessary for rational value judgements. It is irrational to judge or to restrict opportunities based on intrinsic properties. It is rational to assign value to extrinsic behaviors and extrinsic properties. It is rational to assign value judgements to extrinsic behaviors and extrinsic properties. It is irrational to conflate the intrinsic values of an individual with the value judgements given to extrinsic properties. It is rational to require specific intrinsic properties in order to qualify for an opportunity (e.g. male or female, above a certain age, within a certain height range, etc) if those properties may objectively be considered fundamental qualifications for the opportunity.

Said simply: Extrinsic behaviors and properties must be assessed independently of any individual. You can judge extrinsic behaviors of an individual, but those judgements must apply to the same extrinsic behaviors irrespective of the individuals exhibiting those behaviors. Judge the behaviors, not the individual. Do not judge the intrinsic properties of an individual. Social attraction (physical or otherwise) will naturally consider intrinsic and extrinsic properties. Institutional and public policy must not discriminate based on intrinsic properties.

### Extrinsics and Individuals

Extrinsics makes a clear distinction between intrinsic and extrinsic properties of individuals, and attempts a clear separation of extrinsic properties from the individuals who acquire them. In applying value judgements to extrinsic properties and not the individual, the justice system can be more just. [Actions, behaviors and decisions should be on trial]


### Extrinsics and Institutions

Institutions are not people.

### Extrinsics and Public Policy

Rational and fair public policy must ignore the intrinsic properties of an individual. There may be times when policy will address an imbalance or an injustice involving the intrinsic properties of an individual or group. Barring such responses to a need, public policy should remain neutral in regard to intrinsic properties of individuals.

### Extrinsics and Liberty

All entities should be accorded the rights of Personal or Regional Liberty regardless of intrinsic properties. Only extrinsic properties are cause for forfeiture of these rights.


EVS and the Mathematics of Value
------------------------

### Definitions

-  *__Entity__* 
    - An entity is a person or man-made institution.
    - Institutions include businesses and government organizations.
-  *__Property__*
    - A property is some extrinsic, intrinsic or composite property that describes an entity.
-  *__Event__*
    - An event is some discrete activity or behavior for which there is some record.
    = Events have scope, such as public or private.
    - Event types includes physical actions, social actions, political actions, speech, decisions, encounters with others (willing or unwilling), and responses to other events.
    - Entities participate in events as active parties (actors), receivers of action, or passive observers.
    - Passive observers are present during the event and have no direct involvement.
    - Receivers may be the object of physical action or may be affected by decisions.
    - Reactors are entities reacting physically (through direct action) or socially (through speech or policy) to some past event.
-  *__Value__*
    - Classification and measurement of the value of a property or event.
    - Values can be social, political, personal or professional in nature.
    - Political values focus on public policy and are often described in such terms.
    - Examples of political values include broad concepts such as health care or immigration and specific concepts such as support for work visas or insurance coverage for birth control.
    - Social values focus on equality and justice and are often described in such terms.
    - Examples of social values include broad concepts such as racial bias or specific concepts such as equal gender pay.
    - Professional values focus on skills and experience and are often described in such terms.
    - Examples of professional values include broad concepts such as leadership or specific concepts such as 
    - Personal values focus on areas of personal preference or intrinsic properties.
    - Examples of personal values include broad concepts such as music preference or specific concepts such as opinion on a particular book.
    - Values can have composite types, such as social + political.
-  *__Association__*
    - A defined relationship between nodes in an EVS graph.
    - Events are connected by causal associations.
    - Properties and events are connected to values through value associations.
    - 
-  *__Perspective__*
    - An extrinsic perspective is a set of values prioritized for application to a particular situation.
    - Individuals may have separate personal, professional, and political perspectives, each with a different prioritization of values.

### EVS

Properties and events are associated with one or more values.
Each value association carries a positive measurement of the association from minor (.01) to strong (1).  The values are positive (greater than 0) or negative (-.01 to -1) to indicate that a property or event is 

Entities are associated with properties and events.
Each event association carries a positive measurement of the association from unproven (.01) to factual (1).
Each property association carries a positive measurement of the association from (.01) to (1).

Events are associated to other events through causal associations.
Each causal association carries a positive measurement of the association from weak (.01) to strong (1).
Values associated with an event are further associated to other events through causal associations.  If event 1 causes event 2 with an association of .5, and event 2 has a value association of .9 with value 1, event 1 has a .9 x .5 = .45 association with value 1.


Complex Example:

Individuals Abe, Beth, Carter, Donna, Eva, Frank, Greg, Harriet are considered.
Non-person entities Daily News are considered.


Event 1: Eva files a complaint against Abe for spousal abuse, including pictures.
Event 2: Eva drops the charges against Abe.
Event 3: Abe files for divorce from Eva.
Event 4: Abe agrees to a large lump-sum alimony payment for Eva.
Event 5: Abe and Donna get married.
Event 6: Donna files a complaint against Abe for spousal abuse with no corroborating evidence.
Event 7: Donna drops the charges against Abe.
Event 8: Abe files for divorce from Donna.
Event 9: Abe agrees to a large recurring alimony payment for Donna.
Event 10: Abe and Beth get married.
Event 11: Carter asked Abe to work in a cabinet position in the federal government.
Event 12: Frank performs a background check for Abe and discovers events 1, 2, 4, 6 and 7.
Event 13: Frank informs Carter of events 1, 2, 3, 6 and 7 and advises against hiring Abe.
Event 14: Carter hires Abe for the cabinet position.
Event 15: Greg, who works for Carter, tells Frank to skip the rest of the background check.
Event 16: Daily News reports that events 1, 6, 12, 13 and 14 occurred, making the events public.
Event 17: Harriet, who works for Carter, does not publicly confirm or deny the events.
Event 18: Harriet publicly questions the veracity of event 16 and the integrity of Daily News.
Event 19: Abe does not publicly confirm or deny the events.
Event 20: Carter publicly denies the events.
Event 21: Greg publicly denies the events.
Event 22: Frank publicly confirms events 12 and 13 and publicly discloses event 15.
Event 23: Harriet publicly denies events 12 and 13 and questions Frank's integrity and motives.
Event 24: Greg publicly confirms event 15.
Event 25: Carter publicly reacts to event 20 by calling it an allegation.
Event 26: Harriet publicly provides a history of events that omits event 15.
Event 27: Abe resigns from his position.
Event 28: Daily News reports on event 15 in more detail.
Event 29: Greg publicly provides a different history of events from Harriet and does include event 15.
Event 30: Carter publicly wishes Carter well and expresses sadness that he has resigned.
Event 31: Daily News publicly asks Harriet why Carter has not publicly addressed events 1 or 6.
Event 32: Harriet publicly reacts to event 31 with an official history of events that differs from events 26, 28 or 29.

In the end, each of these 32 events were made public with some level of supporting documentation.

Events 1-10 would be a matter of public record.  Confirmation of the facts of those events would be simple.  While events 1-10 would have significance to the invididuals involved, these are not in and of themselves public events for the public to react to.  These would normally have private scope.

It may not be intuitive, but Abe has an association to event 1 as a receiver and Eva is the actor.  What are not listed here are the event(s) in which Abe was the actor and Eva was the receiver (the abuse).  These would need to be made public properly in order for the associations to be made.  That distinction is important.

Events 11-32 have public scope, as these involve public declarations or resources in the public domain.  Events 1 and 6 were brought into public domain through reporting.

Values may be associated with each event in the public scope.  For example, event 14 may be associated with negative scores in various forms of integrity and women's issues.  Event 15 may be associated with negative scores in integrity and rule of law.  Event 18 may be associated with negative scores in various forms of integrity and honesty. Events 29,30 and 32 may be associated with negative scores in integrity, honesty and competence.  Event 30 may be associated with negative scores in various forms of women's issues.  Likewise, many of the vents may be associated with positive scores in loyalty.

Because they were brought into public scope, events 1 and 6 may be associated with negative scores in various forms of women's issues and rule of law.

Events 1 and 6 have causal associations to events 15 and 27 with some score between .01 and 1.  Values associated with events 1 and 6 have an indirect association with events 15 and 27.  For example, if event 1 has a -.9 score in issue 1, and event 1 has a causal association to event 15 with a score of .2, event 15 has an indirect association with issue 1 with a score of (.2 x -.9) -0.18.

The value associations with events are further associated with actors, reactors and observers of each event.  Actors receive the full value association for each value associated directly or indirectly with an event.  Observers receive .25 of the value associated with an event.  Observer associations will be replaced by reactor associations if an observer later reacts to the event.



 

